We've seen how we can write generic functions using C++ templates in this video will take it a step
further and we'll learn how we can you see post plus templates to create generic classes.
So what is the C++ class template a class template is similar to a function template.
But instead of creating a generic function we'll be creating a generic class.
So this implies generic attributes constructors destructors methods and so forth.
Just like we can plug in any type to a function template.
We can do the same with a class template.
We've already used class templates in several places in this course.
The most obvious is when we created vector objects we didn't just say I want a vector we said I want
a vector of a specific type and that's where the class templates come in.
So the class template is a generic blueprint that the compiler uses to create specialized classes.
That's what metaprogramming is all about.
As I mentioned in the previous slides templates can be very complex class templates in particular can
be very complex.
Imagine combining inheritance dynamic polymorphism operator overloading templates and other advanced
C++ features together.
Super powerful but also complex.
So let's see how we can use class templates.
Let's say we want a class that will hold an integer and a string and we want that class to be called
item we can write a simple class as follows.
Note that we have two private attributes.
Name and value.
A constructor that initializes attributes to those provided by the user.
And we have a get name and get value getter methods.
Of course we could add other methods but we won't in this example since the purpose is to focus on how
we can make this class generic.
So let's suppose that now we need a class that's similar to the Item class except instead of an int
and a string.
We want a model a double and a string.
What can we do.
Sure we can create a new class just like we did for item that has a double in the string but we'd have
to name it something other than items since we can't overload class names in the same namespace and
we don't want to create a complex hierarchy with dynamic polymorphism.
So let's see how we can use class templates to allow us to just write the blueprint for the class
for us we can replace the type of the value attribute from int to T in this case.
But remember this can be any name.
Then we go through the class and wherever we used value or return values type we replace it with a T.
That's pretty much it.
Now of course this won't compile.
We need to tell the compiler that this is a template class and we can do this by adding the template
declaration before the class declaration and provide the template parameter.
This is a pretty simple example but it sure makes the item class much more generic and much more useful.
Now if we want to create instances of items we can simply provide the type of the value in the template
parameter and the compiler will take care of generating the correct class from the template in the first
example we're creating.
Item 1 is an item with a value of type int and a name of type String name will always be of type strings
so we don't have to provide it as a template parameter in the second example value will be of type double
and the third example value will be a stud string.
And in the final example we're creating a vector that holds items and those items will have value as
an integer.
That's it.
Just as with function templates there's no limit to the number of template parameters you can have.
And of course there may be of different types in this example.
We're creating a class template called my pair that models a pair of data items.
The types of these data items can be different if we wish or they can be the same.
Note that in this case we use a struct.
Since all we want to do is associate first with second.
We're just modeling data so we won't bother with constructors methods and so forth.
Now if we wanted to create my Peyre objects is really easy in the first example we create P1 as a my
pair of stood string and integer and we initialize it to Frank and 100 in the second example we create
P2 as a pair of integer and double and we initialize it to 124 and thirteen point six.
And in the last example we create a vector that holds my pair objects and those objects are in double
pairs.
This my pair class can be a very handy class since it can associate any two pieces of data of any type.
In fact it's so useful that it's already defined for us and stood pair.
We need to include the utility header file and then we can use this to pair class which is implemented
very much like the way we implemented my pair.
In addition to the pair template class C++ also has a template class named tuple.
It allows you to have a fixed number of elements of any type.
It's not just limited to two items like the pear class.
OK so let's head over to the idea and we'll see these class templates will also implement our own template
based array class.
Ok so I mean the IDM in the Section 20 workspace and I mean the class templates project in this project
what I'd like to do is go over those two templates that we talked about in the slides and then we'll
switch to this other project up here a class template array and will implement an array class based
on a template.
OK so first things first I put a little a note here that's important.
Template classes are typically completely contained in header files.
So we would have the template class in item dot age and I'm talking about this template class and I
want to talk about right here and there would be no item see Peepy file associated with it.
Now that makes sense because what we have is a blueprint.
The compiler is not compiling this blueprint.
It's basically using it to create a specialized version of it that will be compiled.
So it's important if you start putting stuff in the files you're going to run into all kinds of issues.
There are ways to get it to work but they're beyond the scope of this course so for this course put
all your template classes in their own dot h file.
Let's talk about this template class this is the one we did in the slides and we'll do this one first
and then we'll do this smaller one downhere second.
So what have I got here.
I've got a template class I know it's a class right here is not a function it's called item.
And here's my template parameter right here.
So what do I know about this.
Well I know I've got a class called item and it's got two private attributes one is a string called
name and one is a value of type T and that's what's going to be replace or plugged in.
I've got a constructor here that just constructs it based on my name and my values that are being passed
in I've got to get name and I've got to get value and notice to get value returns t.
So that's pretty straightforward I think.
And now let's look at this second template down here.
This is the pear template that we created.
And we're going to use a struct here instead of a class.
But that's again it's perfectly fine.
We're only modeling data in this case.
So we've got this template parameter list right here where we've got a T1 and a t to.
And they could be the same or they could be different.
So all we're doing is we're saying the first item here.
In other words this is this and this is just a name and attribute name first is the T-1 second is a
T-2.
So what we're really doing is associating two data types and calling it my pair.
Just like we did in the slides.
So let me go down to the main and I'll show you some examples of this and I'll walk through these one
at a time.
So first thing on 09:30 right here I'm creating an item one object and it's of type item.
That's my class value is going to be an integer.
So remember I have a string and I have a value.
In this case I always have a string first and then this guy right here that's going to be the t that
can be replaced with any type I want.
So in this case item one will look something like this.
Item 1 is an object.
It has a name attribute and it's got a value attribute.
The name is always going to be a strain in this case it's going to be frank and the value.
That's our template parameter that can be any type I-PASS into this right.
That's what I'm doing right here.
So in this case it's going to be an integer and it's going to be 100.
So that's kind of what's going on.
So when I display item 1 Get name I'm getting this guy right here.
And that's going to display Frank.
And then when I say Item 1 to get value it's going to get to 100 here OK.
So that's that example.
This tickle like this one here 9:33 and we'll run these in just a bit.
So here I'm creating again an item.
That's my object name and it's an item.
But look at my template parameter here.
I'm saying the second one is a string.
So what that will look like is.
Now I've got item 2 it has a name.
It also has a value.
In this case they're both going to be strings.
The first one will be frank.
That's my name.
And value will be Professor.
Now in the output statement item to get name we'll get Frank right here an item to get value we'll get
professor.
That's what will be displayed.
Frank professor now this one.
Here's a little more complicated and I did this one on purpose just so you can see how you can build
these things up because sometimes you'll see these defined this way.
Now let's walk through this one really slowly.
Item three is my optics.
Let me write that down right here.
This is item 3.
And we know that item 3 is an item.
OK so it's going to have a name and it's going to have a value but what are we saying that the value
is.
Well in this case the value is another item but that other item has a string as the value makes sense.
So this value here in Beletski name is Frank let's get rid of that one for us.
This too that really easily here.
And I'm using my initialiser right here to do it and that my value is going to be an item and that item
has a name and a value.
OK as you can see them I'm just building them up I'm nesting one within the other.
So in this case the name will be C++.
And the value will be Professor in this case.
All right so now when I say Item 3 Get name I'm getting this guy right here.
That's item three's name in order to get to these guys in here I've got to go through the value.
So in this case I'm saying Item three get the value.
Now I've got this item and then I'm saying get the name.
So now I've got C++ and over here I'm just saying Item three get value.
That takes me to the value that is an item remember that I'm going to get the value from the value which
is going to be Professor in this case.
So when I print this I should get Frank one hundred Frank.
Professor Frank C++ professor.
All right so let me clear the screen and we'll give it a run.
And what we've got here is we've got Frank 100 Frank Professor Frank C++ professor.
Just what we expected.
OK.
So let me make a little bit more room here.
And now what I'm going to do is I'm simply going to take some items and create a vector of those items.
So in this case I'm creating a vector and that vector is going to hold item objects.
And in this case the values will all be doubles.
Remember the names are always strings.
But in this case the values will be doubles and I'm just going to push back three of them so I'm going
to say Larry one hundred point zero most 100.0 and Curly three hundred point zero.
I'm creating items here and I'm pushing those items on this on the vector and then all I'm doing is
looping through the vector with they arranged base for loop right here.
So for each item in that vector get its name get its value.
That's it.
Now that's pretty cool because I'm doing all of this using a template class.
So if we run this we should see Larry 100 Moe 200 and Kerley 300.
So let's give that around and there you go.
Larry is 100 most 200 and Curly is 300.
Just what we expected.
OK so now let's look at the pair.
That's this last piece right here.
So uncomment that out and we will run this now and you can see what's happening here I'm creating my
pair and my pair is going to associate a pair of types right in this case a string and an integer.
There's a string there's the integer here I'm associating an integer and a double there's the integer
there's the double.
This guy is how he won.
This is called P2.
And if I want to display those values all I have to say is P 1. first to display the second.
I would just say one second and that will display Frank one hundred.
Then for P2 we could do the same two first P2 second display 124 and the thirteen point six.
Let's give this one a run and you could see down here we've got Frank 100 124 thirteen point six.
So this gives you an idea of using two pretty simple template classes that we've created.
Now I'm going to pause this for a second and I'll be right back and I'm going to jump right into this
class template array project and what we'll do there is we'll create another class template for an array.